# CS499 Computer Science Capstone

My name is James Nikolaou and a President’s List student at Southern New Hampshire University, majoring in Computer Science with a concentration in Software Engineering. This README includes a general layout of this repository and my Professional Self-Assessment.

## Repository layout:
This repository contains my professional self-assessment within this README and three folders containing my source code, my enhanced code, my code review, and brief explanation of each folder within the separate folders.

## Professional Self-Assessment

My journey through the Computer Science program was brutal but rewarding. I have always loved technology but since I was 18, I’ve been working in blue collar work in various career fields. I’ve always enjoyed working with my hands on my own projects, but I quickly grew bored at work with very seldom finding it mentally stimulating or challenging. My wife eventually convinced me to get into the tech world that I love, saying: “If you got that big brain in your head, you might as well use it!”. I thank her every day for pushing me in the right direction and her unconditional support.
Even though I love technology, I really had no coding experience to speak of, only some electrical programming specific to my days in maintenance and working on vehicles. I had great support from my professors during my time here at SNHU, and with the help of my textbooks and Google I’ve finally made it through my program. Trying to balance working rotating swing-shift, school, and my family has been quite the juggling act but it’s all coming to a close.

My strengths in the coding world come from my rigorous testing and examination of the product requirements. First and foremost, creating a layout for any product that incorporates all the requirements of said product is the first and most critical step. Each requirement completed would then be put through stringent testing to ensure the product works as intended. After my work ethic and planning, I’ve become confident in several languages. C++ is my strongest language, followed by C, SQL, Java, Python, Non-SQL, JavaScript, TypeScript, and Kotlin. C++ quickly became my favorite language because of its versatility and efficiency. It does have its flaws, mainly in memory management, but should these items be mitigated the language offers virtual freedom in the creation of whatever product is required. It is able to create simple data structure systems, thrive in the embedded technology world, and even perform well in 3D modeling and rendering/creation.

Collaboration is a critical skill in any working environment. Throughout the program in various courses there were open discussion boards for students to work together on projects, my 3D modeling/rendering class and my Android Development classes I was very active there as these were my hardest classes for me. In my current position as a team lead on a machine producing adult care products, collaboration is the only way to survive. Our teams of five must work together on daily tasks, troubleshooting, and quality management to produce top-tier products.

Communication with stakeholders will be a critical skill in my future work. Stakeholders need to know where their money is going to be and if it will provide the returns they need. It will be my job and my future team’s job to ensure that they are updated with all new products, product changes, product problems, and timelines for each product’s development.

Software Engineering and Databases really kicked in towards my later part of my career at SNHU. Several classes, including Data Systems and Analysis, Introduction to SQL, Reverse Software Engineering to name a few taught me the skills to code efficiently and effectively across various platforms. It allowed me to incorporate Data Systems and Structures within these programs and manipulate Database systems for proper storage and retrieval of data across various concepts.

Security is arguably one of the most important aspects of software development, saving the coding of the products. In our ever-growing world of technology security is becoming more and more important to protect the end users, manufacturers, and all companies engaged in the digital world. My Secure Coding class really taught me strong skills including no trust and defense-in-depth. My favorite language C++ is very vulnerable to malicious input and manipulation of data types, so creating layers of defense with user input checks is critical to the functionality of the product. SQL injections are one of the most common forms of security risks in the online world, and creating robust defense mechanics against these is imperative for all databases and programming systems.

The conclusion of my Professional Self-Assessment will include three artifacts I focused on from earlier in my career and how I enhanced these items to be up to professional coding standards as well as strengthening the skills in their respective fields.

The artifacts within this repository provide demonstration of some of the most important fields of programming: Software Engineering, Data structures and algorithms, and Databases. Each of these components are within virtually any product being produced today, if not a combination of the three. This repository has its artifacts as follows: Artifact 1, Software Engineering, Artifact 2, Data structures and algorithms, and Artifact 3, Database systems.

Artifact 1 covers software engineering principles from one of my earlier classes, Programming Languages. It was my first introduction to C++ and this project in particular is the creation of a static clock that can be iterated by one hour, minute, and/or second at a time. The original code did provide functionality, but it was clunky, and security was not enforced. The enhanced code focuses on encapsulation of code, inheritance, and other strong development principles. It also incorporates user input check systems to ensure the program functions as intended and safely.

Artifact 2 covers my time in Data Structures and Algorithms class where I created a school course list navigation system. The original component allowed the user to upload a course list, navigate said course list, and gather more information about the courses on this list. The enhanced artifact built on this concept and added a course scheduler as well. It allows the user to read in a txt file to a construct storage vector, navigate the courses and find more information about them, and with the updates allows the user to create a weekly schedule for these courses that checks for date/time overlaps as well as repeat classes. The user then can write out the course planner into a txt file for portability. This enhanced artifact also incorporates new security features to manage memory management and user input validation techniques.

Artifact 3 covers database systems but in a less traditional approach. The original artifact is from my Android Development class where I created a weight tracking app that allows the user to create a login, set a target weight, and add daily weights during the week to track their weight journey. The login information, target weight, and daily weights all were stored in their own data tables within the built in SQL lite database system in the application. The enhanced artifact fixed some security issues, including the main issue of no unique logins (all users shared the same data sets). The database systems were updated with fully functional CRUD (create, read, update, delete) functions for each table within the database.
